Bitcoin backups page in Private key management (#210)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/foundations/backups.md

---
layout: guide
title: Bitcoin backups
description: A beginner's guide to Bitcoin backups.
nav_order: 11

> parent: Foundations

Author: The rationale was that it might be relevant to reference it from other chapters (Onboarding etc.) but am considering putting it in PKM.

permalink: /guide/foundations/backups/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: https://bitcoin.design/assets/images/guide/foundations/wallet-interoperability/wallet-interoperability-preview.jpg
---

<!--

Editor's notes

A guide meant to lower the barrier for first time users of self-custody wallets.

Illustration sources

// 

-->

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/backups.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/backups@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/backups-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/backups-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Several devices exchanging data"
   width = 1600
   height = 700
   layout = "full-width"
%}

# Bitcoin backups

> The self-custody of bitcoin is an important right, but also a financial responsibility that can take practice getting used to, and scale from pocket money to life savings.

Author: Changed in another commit.

> Making a secure backup of your wallet should be straightforward. This guide is meant to provide a starting point for simple bitcoin backups. From a basic setup, you can increase the security level as your funds grow. 

Author: Changed in another commit

## What are backups?

> When we talk about backups, we mean saving the information needed to restore access to a wallet outside of the application that created the private keys. Most often, this will be the *recovery-phrase* of of 12 or 24 words, but can also include other information like a *pass-phrase*.

Reviewer: *recovery-phrase* would be good to link to glossary `guide/glossary/#recovery-phrase`

Author: Not yet mentioning derivation path, but will look into it for the template and consider how/if to talk about it on this page.

Author: Now mention briefly, can expand in the future.

> The main risks that backups need to protect against are:

Reviewer 2: i'm having trouble with this part as it can be interpreted in several ways.

does the backup itself need to be resistant to the following?
or does the backup help someone by protecting their normal wallet against the following?

Reviewer 2: After reading till the end, I understand this better. Still the framing could be adjusted instead of "you/r" it becomes definitions of the property.

Example 
- Loss of wallet - even if you lose the device/application holding the private key you can recover
- Remote theft - the private key is not connected to the internet, and cannot be discovered by a bad actor

- Loss of wallet - you lost the device and application holding the private key

> - Remote theft - your private key got discovered online by a bad actor

Reviewer 2: even if a backup is made, if a remote attacker gets a copy of the private key the funds are already compromised.

Author: Changing private key to backup

- Physical damage - your backup got destroyed
- Theft on discovery - your backup got discovered in person by a bad actor
- Catastrophic events - your backup location got destroyed
- Inheritance loss - next-of-kin were unable to access your wallet

## Backup levels, basic to advanced

A basic backup can be done in a few minutes, while more advanced setups can require the purchase of dedicated material and more effort. 

> Let’s look at some real life examples of backup methods for single-key wallets and what they protect against. (Multi-key setups require their own writeup.)

Reviewer: Would be good to link to appropriate sections in PKM that cover single-key wallets and multy-key ones. Also we should double-check if that's how we call this setups in PKM, for consistency.

Author: It's not quite like for like, as that chapter distinguishes between Personal and Shared wallets (which can both have single or multi setups). So for this purpose I think it could be more confusing than helpful to link.

<br>

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/backup-table.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/backup-table@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Table of backup levels"
%}

<br>

#### Level 0
## Encrypted cloud backup 

By storing the recovery-phrase in an online location that is encrypted (not in plain text) and hard to access by anyone other than yourself, you are protected against *loss of wallet*. This is the absolute minimum you should do and only takes a few minutes.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/cloudbackup.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/cloudbackup@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Encrypted cloud backup"
%}

**Do**
- Use an encrypted password manager like 1Password, LastPass, iCloud Keychain

> - Alternatively, use a wallet application with automatic cloud backup

Reviewer: Hm, is it really a good practice to recommend a password manager? Should we mention Photon here?

Author: This will depend on if it's meant for end-users (as currently written), or meant for developers (in which case Photon is relevant).

A password manager is better than plain text or screenshots, and adequate for the amounts stored at this stage.

**Don’t** 
- Screenshot the recovery-phrase and save it in Google Photos, iCloud photos

> - Write down the recovery-phrase in plain text on your device, Google Docs, Dropbox, Notes etc.

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused, this now talks to the `end-user` not really an app designer or dev, so they should discourage the screenshots, etc.

Author: As per discussions on sprint planning call, we will keep this page talking to the end user for now.

**Suitable for**
- For small amounts (less than a months salary) 
- When you can't wait to set up a new wallet until you are at home

<br>

#### Level 1
## Single paper backup

By storing the recovery-phrase written down on paper in your own home you have protected against *loss of wallet* and *remote theft*.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/paperbackup.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/paperbackup@2x.png"
   alt-text = "24 word paper backup"
%}

**Do**

> - Write the recovery-phrase clearly with the words numbered, using permanent ink on card, or a [template](create a template people can print) //ToDo

Reviewer 2: Good opportunity to link to / extend this [Bitcoin Backup Helper](https://sbddesign.github.io/bitcoin-backup-helper/)

> - Put it in an envelope labelled ‘Important’

Reviewer: What's the reasoning for this? Again this talks to the end-user, which isn't our target audience.

Author: Have removed the envelop part.
We should provide solid templates (for printing out and filling out manually) to help people do a good job with backups.

> - Store it in a location where it is unlikely to be found by a non-family member, (alternative locations include: inside a book, at the bottom of a jar filled with coffee beans, behind a painting, in the attic etc.)

Reviewer 2: A family member isn't necessarily someone that can be trusted with this wholly. I think this should be less prescriptive and help someone develop the mental model to think adversarially.

Author: Changed from non-family member to bad actor

> - Document or tell next-of-kin where the backup can be found

Reviewer 2: Where to store the document?

**Don’t** 
- Scribble the recovery-phrase on a piece of paper using a pencil and throw it in a drawer / stick it on the fridge 

**Suitable**
- For small amounts (less than a months salary)
- When you are setting up a new wallet at home

<br>

#### Level 2
## Single metal backup

By storing the recovery-phrase on metal in your own home you have protected against *loss of wallet*, *remote theft* and *physical damage*. 

The best metal backup solutions are resistant to most physical damage, including fire, acid and high pressure.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/metalbackup.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/metalbackup@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Metal backup"
%}

**Do** 

> - Order a dedicated metal backup product, recommendations can be found [here](https://jlopp.github.io/metal-bitcoin-storage-reviews/)

Reviewer 2: for metal backups that you have to punch, it's also important that it is indented properly.

Author: Added point.

- Store it in a location where it is unlikely to be found by a non-family member
- Document or tell next-of-kin where the backup can be found

**Don’t** 
- Make your own solution

**Suitable for**
- Amounts above your monthly salary, but less than half your annual salary

<br>

#### Level 3
## Single backup with discovery protection

> The previous offline backup levels have one flaw in common. If they are discovered by a bad actor, your funds can be stolen.

Reviewer 2: "The previous offline backup levels have one flaw in common"

Just a note: This line highlights why it's not a straight forward process. Reading this I would feel more lost after those options that seemed accessible to me, are now not appropriate enough. Maybe in the intro talk about picking the one thats right for you based on... whats accessible(?) or something along those lines.

Author: Yes, I came to this conclusion myself :)

But to help people get here, we would need to catch them 'before' they have set up a wallet, as many/most software wallets don't allow for adding a passphrase.

Author: Added a recommendation, and cushioned saying this is only necessary for larger amounts

To protect against such a *catastrophic event* we can create multiple backups, and distribute them to other locations. This could be a second home, other family members or a safe deposit box. 

As the risk of discovery increases with the multiplying backups, best practice at this level would be to maintain the protection against theft on discovery like in level 3 for all the additional backups. This could again be by using a pass-phrase, a duplicate hardware wallet with a PIN, or a mix. 

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/multiple-discoveryprotection.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/multiple-discoveryprotection@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Multiple offline backups with discovery protection"
%}

**Do** 
- Document your setup well for next-of-kin now that complexity has increased

**Don’t** 
- Forget to safely store the pass-phrases or PINs

**Suitable for**
- Large amounts
- In locations where catastrophic events are common, or likely to cause severe damage

<br>

#### Level 5

> ## Multi-continental backups

Reviewer 2: I think this should be highlighted as something that we understand may be inaccessible to the majority of people (unless done online which -- don't think we'd be recommending).

Author: Yes this level is a bit far-fetched for most people that need this guide.
We could remove it to be honest.

Author: Removed.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/multi-continental.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/foundations/backups/multi-continental@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Multi-continental backups"
%}

**Do** 
- Document your setup extremely well and in redundant ways.

**Don’t** 
- Forget to safely store the extra words or PINs in multiple locations

**Suitable for**
- Very large amounts
- In situations or times where high risk, or impact of loss is likely

**Alternatives** 
At this level, one can imagine many alternative solutions that could provide similar levels of protection, including multiple distributed hardware wallets with the same recovery-phrase, or multi-sig setups. For very large amounts, get expert advice from a specialist.

<br>

# Inheritance instructions
For any backup setup, sufficient information and understandable instructions for recovering the wallet should be available to next-of-kin.  

> Even though it might feel uncomfortable (or unnecessary if you are young and single), it is never too early to document your wallets. If you don’t there is a very high chance that none of the funds will be available to next-of-kin. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though it might feel uncomfortable (or unnecessary if you are young and single), it is never too early to document your wallets. If no one but you had prior access to the private keys, then no one would be able to recover the funds. 
```

Author: This seems less clear, but I tweaked the sentence in a different commit.
